Road accidents have reached epidemic proportions in Bangladesh. Moreover, it is on the rise every year. In terms of demography, Bangladesh is a third-world developing country with a lot of young and overly fast-growing population. Despite this, the country’s road infrastructure is not developing fast enough to cater for the increasing population. As the population continues to grow, more and more vehicles are on the roads but the number of persons added on the road is not increasing. Hence, they lead to more auto accidents. As per RSF, out of 6911 traffic accidents in the year 2023, 11407 were injured and 6524 were killed including 974 females and 1128 kids. As per a study conducted by the road accident monitoring cell of the Passenger Welfare Association of Bangladesh, 438 lives were lost and 1424 were injured in road traffic accidents in Bangladesh during or right after the Eid holidays. Moreover, this was not as long as the association foretasted, but rather there was an increase of 20 percentage in the number of people who made travels during the extended holidays, either because they were discouraged or encouraged. With road and highway improvement, vehicle speed has escalated in the country. About 7.5 percent of the total passengers were carried by motorcycles, which were allowed to operate on every road and highway including the Padma Bridge. The year 2023 marks a year in which the Eid-ul-Fitr holidays witnessed 304 motorcycle-related fatalities and 565 injuries across 328 road accidents.
To understand the extent of accidents, fatalities, and injuries, a detailed comparative analysis on a year-on-year basis has been undertaken using fresh data for the purposes of our investigation. We also find that there is a problem regarding data transparency in these sectors. Last of all, we… analyze which type of vehicles involved in the most of the accidents with respect to their fatality rates during the festivals. Integrated the outputs, we made our recommendations to the policy makers who solicited them. This becomes an issue, however, if we have other data available such as daily vehicle counts and accidents reported. With better models, we will be able to take care of issues that occur before or after an incident happens at a much deeper level in future.
